Traffic shaping (also known as "packet shaping" or ITMPs: Internet Traffic Management
Practices) is the control of computer network traffic in order to optimize or 
guarantee performance, improve latency, and/or increase usable bandwidth for some
kinds of packets by delaying other kinds of packets that meet certain criteria.  If
a link becomes saturated to the point where there is a significant level of connection
(either upstream or downstrea) latency can rise substantially.  As a result, traffic
shaping can be used to prevent this from occurring and keep latency in check.  Traffice
shaping provides a means to control the volume of traffic being sent into a network
in a specified period (bandwidth throttling), or the maximum rate at which the traffic 
is sent (rate limiting), or more complex criteria such as GCRA.  This control can be 
accomplished in many ways and for many reasons; however traffic shaping is always
achieved by delaying packets.  Traffic shaping is commonly applied at the network
edges to control traffic entering the network, but can also be applied by the 
traffic source (for example, computer or network card) or by an element in the 
network.  Traffic policing is the distinct but related pratice of packet dropping
and packet marking.

Uses
Traffic shaping is sometimes applied by traffic sources to ensure the traffic they
send complies with a contract which may be enforced in the network by a policer.

It is widely used for network traffic engineering, and appears in domestic ISPs'
networks.

Nodes in an IP network which buffer packets before sending on a link which is at
capacity result in a traffic shaping effect.  This can appear at for example a low
bandwidth link (such as dial-up), a particularly expensive WAN link or satellite
hop.

Traffic shaping is often used in combination with:
. Differentiated services, integrated services - including traffic classification
  and prioritization.
. Weighted round robin (WRR)
. Random early detection (RED), Weighted RED(WRED) and RED In/Out (RIO) - lessens
  the possibility of port queue buffer tail drops and this lowers the likelihood of
  TCP global synchronization.
. A number of port queue buffers
. VLAN tagging IEEE 802.1q


